In this lecture, I'll give you an overview of IPv4 address exhaustion and network address translation.
That's NAT. Now,
a lot of what we're going to cover here was already spoken about back in the subnetting section, but
that was a while back.
So I'll give you a quick review again here.
First off, our RFC1918 private addresses. The IETF document standards with RFC and
RFC1918
specifies private IP address ranges which are not routable on the public Internet.
So if you send traffic with a destination address, which is a private IP address out to the Internet,
then the service provider routers will just drop that traffic.
Private addresses were originally designed for hosts which should have no Internet connectivity. For
example, maybe it's a university and they need to have connectivity between the hosts internally, but
they don't want the students to have any Internet access.
Public IP addresses cost money.
And if an organization is a part of their network where the hosts need to communicate with each other
over IP but they don't need outside connectivity to the Internet, then they can assign those hosts
private IP addresses.
There is a range of private addresses in each address class - A, B and C. Our range in class A is
10.0.0.0 - 10.255.255.255, which can also be written in 10.0.0.0/8.
The range in Class B is 172.16.0.0 - 172.31.255.255.
That can be written as 172.16.0.0/12. And the range in class C is
192.168.0.0-192.168.255.255.
That's 192.168.0.0/16. So the class A range of 10.0.0.0/8,
and the class C range of 192.168.0.0/16,
they're dead
easy to remember.
The one to commit to memory is the class B range, which is 172.16.0.0
172.16.0.0
to 172.31.255.255.
Now, the designers of IPv4 did not envision the explosive growth of its use and 4.3 billion
addresses seemed more than enough.
They didn't know that everybody would be wanting to get on the Internet and not just with one device,
but with their laptop, their mobile, their tablet, etc., and that's just personal users.
We've also got all the business users as well.
So 4.3 billion addresses seemed like it was going to be more than enough.
But of course, it wasn't. Also that 4.3 billion addresses,
that's just a theoretical limit.
It doesn't actually get anywhere near that with the usable addresses because the protocol is not particularly
efficient in its use of the available space.
And many of those addresses are wasted.
The Internet authorities started to predict address exhaustion in the late 1980s and IPv6 was developed
in the 90s as a long term solution to this problem.
IPv6 users are 128-bit address compared to IPv4's 32-bit address.
So the address is 4x as long when you write it down.
But it's not just a 4x bigger address space,
IPv6 actually provides more than 7.9x10 to the power of 28 times as many addresses
as IPv4.
So way, way more addresses than are available in IPv4.
And the idea is that the IPv6 address space will never run out.
But a problem is that there's not a seamless migration path from IPv4 to IPv6. IPv6 is not
backwards compatible with IPv4. There's not an easy way to change from one to the other.
So NAT, network address
translation, was implemented as a temporary workaround to mitigate the lack of IPv4 addresses until
organizations had time to migrate to IPv6.
So the original idea with using NAT for this was that it was just going to be temporary until everybody
had time to change to IPv6.
But it's actually turned out to be more of a long term solution in the real world.
An organization can use private IP addresses on their inside network when they're using NAT, but still
grant their hosts Internet access by translating them to their outside public IP addresses.
That's the translation.
Many hosts in the inside can share a few or a single public IP addresses on the outside. So let's look and
see how that works.
So we've got Office A, which is actually a company on the left, and Office B or Company B on the right.
And you can see that both companies are using the same private IP addresses.
They're using 192.168.10.0/24.
That's not a problem. There's no conflict because the private IP addresses are just used on
the inside.
They're not used for traffic when it's going between the companies on the outside.
You can also see that the companies are reusing public IP addresses here as well.
Company A, Office A,
they've got 200 hosts on the inside, but they've only got 14 public addresses,
that's the range 203.0.113.1/28. Company B, they've only got 6 addresses,
203.0.113.16/29.
But they've got 100 hosts on the inside.
Your public IP addresses cost money, so it's good that we don't need to pay for a public IP address
for every host on the inside.
Also, that wouldn't work anyway because of the lack of IPv4 addresses. So NAT solves that because we
can use those private addresses on the inside and they can share multiple, the same IP, public IP addresses
on the outside.
Many industry experts predicted in the early 2000s that IPv6 would be ubiquitous within a few years,
that everybody would be using it, but it hasn't actually worked out that way.
Most normal enterprises today are using RFC1918 IPv4 addresses with NAT. They're not using IPv6
at all.
RFC1918 has the security benefit of hiding inside hosts by default.
But on a private IP address, they don't have a publicly available IP address, so it's not possible for
attackers on the inside to directly connect to them from the outside.
So that makes things more secure.
Plus, network engineers have more experience with IPv4 than IPv6.
Like I said, most places are just using IPv4 a day.
IPv6 is very different than IPv4 and people tend to not like change.
So engineers are comfortable already working with IPv4. NAT is working great as a workaround, as
a solution.
So that's why the uptake of IPv6 hasn't actually been as quick as people were originally expecting.